---
title: "12-09-2019 Lab Notebook Entry"
categories:
  - DNA Extraction

---

## Purpose:
Second attempt at extracting sea cuke sperm DNA using the J. Griffin protocol

### DNA Extraction

#### Materials and Reagents

##### Extraction buffer minus prot. k and DTT

|Qty|unit|Material|
|---|---|---|
|17.667|uL|6M Guanidine thiocyanate|
|500|uL|5M NaCl|
|833.33|uL|30% Sarkosyl|

> I add the powdered DTT and proteinase K straight to the extraction buffer right before use 

##### Sodium Citrate

|Qty|unit|Material|
|---|---|---|
|1.071|g|Sodium citrate|
|5|mL|Abs Ethanol|
|~44|mL|DI water|

> Takes awhile to dissolve. Helps to heat it up or place on a shaker

##### Sperm Wash Buffer

For ~20mL per a sample

|Qty|unit|Material|
|---|---|---|
|.1785|g|NaCl|
|400|uL|.5 M EDTA ph 8.0|
|~18|mL|DI water|

> EDTA solution was from 5/1/19

##### 6M Guanidine thiocyanate

|Qty|unit|Material|
|---|---|---|
|17.7259|g|Guanidium thiocyanate|
|~11|mL|DI water|

##### 5M NaCl

|Qty|unit|Material|
|---|---|---|
|14.6798|g|NaCl|
|~44|mL|DI water|

##### 30% Sarkosyl

|Qty|unit|Material|
|---|---|---|
|7.5|g|N-lauryl sarcosine|
|~17|mL|DI water|

 >Used old sarkosyl powder. Solution is yellow. Also very foamy and difficult to dissolve. Due to various attempts to get it to dissolve, the concentration is probably not accurate, but should still do the job. 

#### Steps
1. Thawed gonads in water
2. added ~1mL gonads to 2ml centrifuge tube
3. added 1 mL sperm wash that was previously made
4. centrifuged 3k rpm for 3 min
5. poured off supernatent
6. added 1mL sperm wash
7. vortexed 15 seconds at max
8. cent. 3k rpm for 10 min
9. steps 5-8 repeated 3x times
10 poured off supernatent
11. vortexed
12. added 1 mL extraction buffer and vorted then transferred to 15 mL falcon tube
13. added 2 mL extraction buffer to 15mL falcon tube
14. added .0751g DTT to falcon tube
15. added .002g prot. K to falcon tube
16. dropped on ground
{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/2019-09-12/20190912_220910.jpg" caption="lysate solution immediately after extraction buffer, DTT, and prot. K were added"  %}  

17. placed on shaking incubator set to 56 degrees celsisu at about 50 rpm.
> start: 2215  
> stop: 0945 on 13-09-19 (next day)

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/2019-09-12/20190912_231522.jpg" caption="lysate solution two hours after incubation began"  %}  

#### Results
No noticeable change in lysate texture and content after incubating overnight vs after 1 hr. 



