---
title: "13-09-2019 Lab Notebook Entry"
---

## Purpose:
DNA extraction continued from the previous day. Will attempt to perform both phenol/chloroform and the griffin method. Lysate was split into three different 15mL falcon tubes (1.5 mL for precipitations and .75 ml lysate was set aside for QC). 

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/2019-09-13/20190913_094735.jpg" caption="lysate after incubating overnight"  %}  

### Materials and Reagents

|Qty|unit|material|
|---|----|--------|
|1.5|mL|Isopropanol|
|4.5|mL|Lysate|
|6|mL|sodium citrate solution|
|2.8|mL|TE-saturated phenol|
|.1|mL|chloroform|
|2|mL|70% ethanol|
|.5|mL|10mM Tris-HCl pH 8|
|.405|g|Agarose|
|40|mL|.5x TBE|
|.8|uL|10mg/ml Ethidium Bromide|
|5|uL|Quick-load 1kb DNA ladder|

### Griffin Method

1. added 1 vol of isopropanol (~1.5mL)
> white thread like material formed at isopropanol boundary
{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/2019-09-13/20190913_102032.jpg" caption="DNA precipitation after adding isopropanol"  %}  

2. let sit for a few minutes
3. using pasteur pipette glass hook, Iremoved white stuff and placed in ~2mL sodium citrate solution
4. gently agitated lysate/isop solution to try and precipitate more dna
> note citrate wash gets cloudy at first. Most likely chaotropic agents dispersing into solution
5. let soak while performing phneol/chloroform extraction
{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/2019-09-13/20190913_103353.jpg" caption="precipitated DNA in citrate solution"  %}  

6. repeate citrate wash 2X
7. poured off citrate
8. added 1 mL 70% ethanol, repeated once
9. poured off ethanol, air dried upside down
10. added 500uL 10mM tris-hcl ph 8
11. incubated in water bath set to 65 degrees celsis
> start: 1155  
> stop: 1345
>precipitate did not completely dissolve, but a quick nanodrop gives conc > 2ug/uL 

### Phenol/Chloroform extraction

1. cent. PLG tubes 14k rpm for 1 min
2. added .5 mL lysate each to 3 PLG tube
3. added 400 uL phenol to each tube
4. shaker 10 min at 100 rpm
5. cent. 10 min @ 5k rpm
> note that the shaker is no the same a hula mixer which flips the samples on end at a set rate. So the shaker doesn't mix as vigorously. Not sure why we don't have one. 
> cent PLG failed. All tissue and fluid ended up underneath the gel
{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/2019-09-13/20190913_111148.jpg" caption="lysate sample moved underneath gel"  %}  

6. transferred fluid to new PLG tubes and cent. 10 min @5k rpm
> did not work
7. transferred fluid from one failed attempt to a new PLG tube and added ~100uL chloroform and shook
>turned opaque
8. cent 5 min @5k rpm
>failed: gel moved, but didn't seal. Cloudy/milky and no phase seperation. 

### Gel electrophoresis

Made a 1% agarose gel using .5X TBE and .8uL of 10mg/mL ethidium bromide stock solution. See [protocol](https://www.protocols.io/view/agarose-gel-electrophoresis-7zmhp46) for details

**gel layout**  

|Lane|1|2|3|4|5|6|7|
|----|-|-|-|-|-|-|-|
|sample|Ladder|Isop.|Isop.|Isop|Lys|Lys|Lys|
|Qty (uL)|5|1|1|1|1|1|1|

> ladder = [Quick-load 1kb DNA ladder](https://www.neb.com/products/N0468-Quick-Load-1-kb-DNA-Ladder#Product%20Information)   
> volts: 100  
> start: 1440  
> stop: 1542

> very small amount of HMW DNA from extract in gel. I suspect it is because DNA has not completely dissolved in sample yet or it floated out of the gel well. 

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/2019-09-13/20190913_154537.jpg" caption="Gel with lysate showing a lot of DNA (including HMW) and the precipitate showing very little"  %}  

