---
title: "15-09-2019 Lab Notebook Entry"
categories:
  - DNA Extraction
  - DNA QC
tags:
  - Gel Electrophoresis
  - Nanodrop 
  
---

## Purpose:
Nanodrop QC of previous DNA extraction. Electroelution of DNA from previous gel QC. Phenol/chloroform dna extraction and phase lock gel seperation attempt. DNA extraction using the griffin protocol

### Nanodrop

|Sample|replicate|A260|A260/A280|conc|
|------|---------|----|---------|----|
|Griffin DNA Extract|1|51.169|1.56|2558.4|
||2|51.090|1.54|2554.5|
||3|51.066|1.53|2553.3|
|Griffin Lysate|1|43.322|.80|2062.7|
||2|41.254|.74|2062.7|
||3|39.422|.67|1971.1|

### Electroelution of DNA from previous entry's gel

attempting to elute HMW dna from the gel I ran yesterday. 

#### Steps
1. cut strip of dialysis tubing and soak in water for a few minutes. 
2. place clamp on one side of tub
3. cut out pieces of gel
4. add cut out agarose bits to dialysis tubing and clamp the other side of the tube. Then orient the dialysis tubing so the DNA elutes out the shortest side
5. added 500 uL of .5x TBE to dialysis tubing 
6. 100 volts for 1 hour
7. poured dialysis bag fluid into 1.5 mL centrifuge tube
8. viewed un UV light
> not much there

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/2019-09-15/20190915_141933.jpg" caption="eluted fluid and excised gel under UV light"  %}  

#### results

|Sample|replicate|A260|A260/A280|conc|
|------|---------|----|---------|----|
|elutate|1|.187|1.13|9.4|
||2|.184|1.10|9.2|
||3|.192|1.08|9.6|

whelp, that didn't work very well. The fluid glowed very faintly under UV and the nanodrop results are within the error range for the nanodrop. Don't know if more time was needed or something else.

### Phenol/chloroform extraction of griffin lysate
the griffin protocol uses DTT, sarkosyl, and guanidium thiocyanate to lyse, disrupt membranes, and denature proteins in cells. However, this protocol does not have any steps for removing protein contamination. My hope is that using some phenol/chloroform and PLG tubes I can minimize the protein contamination and make precipitation a little easier. 

#### Steps
1. cent. PLG tubes for 1 min @14k rpm
2. added 250 uL of lysate to each tube
3. added 400 uL phenol and 100 uL chloroform added to each tube
4. shaker 200 rpm for 10 minutes
5. cent. 4k rpm for 10 minutes
> gel didn't seal
6. poured solution into new PLG tubes
7. cent 10 minutes @ 5k rpm
> still not sealing
8. transferred to a new plg tube and added 250 uL to solution
9. cent. 10 minutes @ 5k rpm
> weird result. seperate into 3 layers with gel in between

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/2019-09-15/20190915_143039.jpg" caption="Weird layer separation"  %}  

#### Thoughts
the lysis step is very similar to how rna extraction using Trizol works. Using PLG for that requires something called a dense phase lock gel which is obviously densier. There are instruction on how to make this online. 

### Phenol/chloroform extraction of griffin DNA extract
I am also wondering if it is possible to use the phenol/chloroform method to clean already precipitated DNA/protein. As in, can this be used to clean up already extracted dna?

#### Steps
1. 100 uL of dna solution and a large piece of DNA precipitate added to PLG tube
2. 150 uL of 10mM Tris-HCL ph* added to tube
3. 400 uL phenol and 100uL of chloroform added
4. shaker 200 rpm for 10 min
> inverted a lot too. DNA precip stayed in aqueous solution
5. cent 10 min @ 4k rpm
> didn't seal
6. poured into new PLG and added 400 uL phenol and 100 uL chloroform
7. cent. 10 min @ 5k rpm
8. poured into 15 mL falcon tube
9. added .5 vol 5M ammonium acetate (~250 uL)
10. added 2 vol ice cold absolute ethanol (~1 mL)
> turned cloudy, but no DNA spider webs. Aka, salt precipitated out, but no DNA  

### Dense Phase Lock Gel Centriuge Tubes

#### Materials and Reagents

This is based on a recipe on the pipette jockey website

|Qty|Unit|Material|
|---|---|----|
|20|g|DOW vacuum grease|
|3|g|silicone dioxide|

He states on the website he was able to figure out that the gel should be 15% w/w silicone dioxide and 85% w/w vacuum grease. I downsized the recipe to 3.95 g grease and .8 g silicone dioxide. I used cab-o-sil I found on amazon. The grease mixed with the powder, but it got hard and not very gel like. I think i am using the wrong silicone dioxide. 

### Griffin DNA Extraction

1. .18 g thawed gonads added to 2 mL cent. tube
2. .56 g thawed gonads added to another 2 mL cent tube
3. 2 mL sperm wash added to tubes
4. cent 3k rpm for 10 min
5. poured off supernatent
6. added ~2 mL sperm wash to each
7. vortexed until pellet was resuspended
8. cent 10 min @ 3k rpm
9. steps 5-8 repeated
10. poured off supernatent
11. added 3 mL extraction buffer to 15 mL falcon tube
12. added .083 g DTT to the .56g sample and .0795 g DTT to the .18g sample
13. added .0027 g prot k to the .56g sample and .0017g prot k to the .18g sample
14. incubation shaker 2 hr @ 56 C
{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/2019-09-15/20190915_181316.jpg" caption="Lysate after incubation"  %}  
15. inverted abunch
16. added 1.8ml sodium citrate solution to two 2 mL cent tubes
17. added 3mL isoprpanol to each tube
{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/2019-09-15/20190915_182811.jpg" caption="DNA precipitating after adding isopropanol"  %}  
18. used hooked pastuer pipette to fish out DNA and placed DNA in sodium citrate tube
19. let sit for 30 min
20. citrate wash repeated
21. washed in 70% ethanol
22. added 500 uL 10mM tris-hcl
23. incubated at 65 C in a water bath for about an hour

