---
title: "What if you could choose to be female or male?"
excerpt: "Left hand of darkness"
header:
  teaser: /assets/images/2021-10-15/tumbleweed.jpg
toc: false
---


In Ursula Le Guin's book "The Left Hand of Darkness" she explores the idea of genetically modified humans being able to switch between male and female at will. It takes several months to complete the transitions though. 

I don't know if this is possible. Maybe someday we will understand development and genetics well enough to tweak our bodies that much. But there might be something we can do to deal with another problem that all men have. Our Y chromosome is slowly degenerating. The majority of the Y chromosome can not homologously repair itself using the X chromosome. This is a problem as it is means mutation or large changes in the Y chromosome can't be fixed. Another problem is that the Y chromosome has long sections of palindromic sequences which have a bad habit of homologous recombination within the chromsome. This results in translocations, deletions, and other mutations. These changes can have a number of effects ranging minor changes in gene expression to the Y chromosome being destroyed by the cell. In fact, as men age we slowly lose our Y chromosome. This may be the cause of the physiological feminization of older men. 

But what if we don't need our Y chromosome at all? What if we merged the X and Y chromosomes? Or had two copies of the X chromosome, but one contained the necessary genes for male sex determination? These approaches might even be possible today. 

There at least two species of rodents that completely lack a Y chromosome. One is called the Amami spiny rat (Tokudaia osimensis) and is found off the coast of Japan. The other is the mandarin vole (Lasiopodomys mandarinus). Although the mandarin vole has an arguablely more complex sex determination system as consequence. It has four "neo"-sex chromosomes, has completely lost the Y chromosome and the sex determining gene SRY, and apparently no clear sex determination scheme. A great review of this can be found in the paper [On the Form and Origins of the Bizarre Sex Chromosomal System of the Mandarin Vole](https://academic.oup.com/jhered/article/112/4/328/6245108?login=true).

Ok, so the mandarin vole might not be the best example, but how about the Amami spiny rat? It has completely lost the Y chromosome, but it is currently unknown what gene has taken it's place. A great review on the topic of mammalian sex chromosomes can be found in the paper [Unusual Mammalian Sex Determination Systems: A Cabinet of Curiosities](https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4425/12/11/1770/htm). The take away from this is that we know it is possible. Although having only one X chromosome results in a high meiotic mortality rate. 

what about adding the SRY gene to one X chromosome? In fact, this happens occasionally. If the SRY lands in the specific region of the X chromsome, then it can excape potential X-chromosome inactivation and the person will present as a normal male. Unfortunately, they will be infertile because the majority of the genes on the Y chromosome that have no homologs on the X chromosome are involved in spermatogenisis. So the SRY gene can make you a man, but it can't make you swimmers. [Here](https://file.scirp.org/pdf/OJGen_2013080714422980.pdf) is a case study. On that note though, it would certainly be possible to move the sperm related genes to the x-chromosome. I suspect they would have to be in the x-inactivation region so that there wouldn't be abnormally high expression of those genes though. 

The problem with this is that while there would be homologous repair mechanism to allow the male genes to survive. Sex determination would be a problem for females. Both SRY genes would need to be inactivated to prevent maculinization of females once developed and also during sex determination. In the animal kingdom many animals use environmental cues to determine sex. In this instance, maybe tying SRY expression to a stress hormone would work. So changing the promotor/enhancer sequences of SRY to allow activation via a different pathway. Although, we currently do not have a solid understanding of SRY gene expression. [Here](https://www.karger.com/Article/Abstract/519217) is a solid review on it. 

What about actually being able to change genders whenever we wanted? Is that even possible? Well, some non-mammalian species certainly do it. It has been studied in [Ciclids](https://www.karger.com/Article/Abstract/517197). And a number of other telost (fish) species. In the paper [Roles of estrogens in fish sexual plasticity and sex differentiation](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0016648018305458?casa_token=ntD7I3HfObEAAAAA:aFvDLhJjaAjj9IV-uPn-AGZfCdC5wf4Xqfyn4PUVifLBQWmhBzwnsTf_jVKLFIGqfbPwClqhzBY) estrongen levels are found to be responsible for sex reversals in fish. Changes in estrogen levels is controlled by the expression of one gene: cytochrome
P450 aromatase also known as cyp19a1a in fish. This gene produces a protein is converts androgens to estrogen. Supression of the gene results in a female to male sex change and male to female when it is activated. Additionally, if the sex change is artifically induced the fish will still retain that sex once the sex change is complete. 

Estrogen levels being the key factor in adult sex reversal in fish is both a suprise and not a surprise to me. Estrogen is a major player in human sex phenotypes also so it shouldn't be a surprise in that sense. What is surprising to me is how it seems to be the key molecule for unlocking the change in phenotype. Reorganizing entire organs on a cellular level is not a minor thing for an organism to do. Also interesting is how in fish - if estrogen levels are lowered, the fish defaults to male sex. This is in contrast to humans who's default sex is female. 

Humans obviously have a homologous version of the androgen to estrogen converting gene cytochrome P450 aromatase as we too make estrogen. Administration of estrogen or testosterone do result in some phenotype changes, the changes do not result in a complete sex reversal though and some of those changes are non-reversalble. Maybe if the Y chromosome was merged with the X and everyone had two X chromosomes there might be a potential for a complete sex reversal. Although the anatomical changes would be significant so maybe not? It would be interesting to know if estrogen in fish binds/interacts with genes that they don't in humans/mammals. 


- Note: should add a few more bits about the homologous parts of the anatomy and how the reproductive system parts are derived from the same tissue and what parts are the essential the same and how it could be reabsorbed and changed?

Interesting article about how the Y chromosome isn't as doomed as we might think: [Meiotic Executioner Genes Protect the Y from Extinction](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0168952520301542)
